Zachary Ziebell

ANTH1830/HIAA2212

Virtue-Writing

In Plato’s dialogue *Protagoras*, Socrates confronts the eponymous
sophist in an argument concerning whether virtue can be taught.^1^ The
argument begins when Socrates accompanies his student Hippocrates on a
journey to the home of Callias, where Protagoras is staying;
Hippocrates, a young aristocrat, wishes to enter the political sphere of
Athens, and desires the instruction of Protagoras so that he might
cultivate his virtue. Socrates is deeply skeptical of the sophist’s
pedagogical capabilities–he firmly maintains that virtue is not
teachable–and so he and Protagoras enter a lengthy and disjointed
argument.

It’s often said that Socrates serves as a mouthpiece for Plato in many
of the dialogues, and this–at least at first glance–seems to be the case
in the *Protagoras*. Socrates espouses a rather pessimistic view
concerning human politics: because virtue is not teachable, only a few
of us will ever be experts, and in Athenian democracy their voices get
drowned out anyway, because everyone thinks they’re virtuous. Plato, who
had once desired to be involved in Athenian politics, had reason to be
pessimistic: after all, his teacher Socrates had been executed by the
Athenian government.

The sophists, on the other hand, believed that virtue can and should be
cultivated. In fact, their livelihood depended on it; sophists like
Protagoras made their living through offering young Greek men tutelage
in virtue in exchange for a fee.^2^ For those who wished to enter
politics, the ability to persuade others through rhetoric was understood
as both essential and intertwined with virtue. When interrogated by
Socrates about what Hippocrates will gain from Protagoras’s service,
Protagoras’s reply sounds like curricular logic or self-help jargon: he
speaks of life-management skills, and maximizing potential for success.

In the middle of the dialogue, Protagoras draws an extended case for the
instructability of virtue through the example of a child’s upbringing,
describing how moral lessons are instilled in the child through signals
of reward and punishment. The argument is then encapsulated in a single
metaphor: the laws of society define the boundaries of our behavior, and
just as the student learns how to write by following the lines
pre-inscribed in a tablet, so does he learn virtue by modeling his life
off the laws prescribed by his *polis*. The young scribe learns to write
through copying letterforms
w![](media/image1.png){width="2.8652023184601925in"
height="2.76458552055993in"}ithin the ruled lines of his master’s
tablet, and learns virtue through copying the examples of his elders
within the rules of social conduct. This metaphor–in which written
boundary and social boundary converge into a single choking
restraint–repeats itself many times in history, culminating in a late
20th-century absurdity known as the discipline packet.

Protagoras’s argument is notable for being one of the few extant
examples that describe classical European methods of writing
instruction, the others being found in the (much later) writings of
Quintilian, Seneca, and Maximus of Tyre.^3^ In all, the technique
remains fairly consistent: the pupils were given pre-inscribed
guides–either parallel lines or faint outlines of letterforms–and
instructed to copy over them. In the schools of Middle Kingdom Egypt,
scribes learned by copying from textbooks called *Kemyt*, which
contained idioms reinforcing societal norms.^4^ In ancient Syria,
Sumerian scribes were trained from boyhood at schools known as *Eduba*;
their days consisted of long hours copying cuneiform onto clay tablets,
punctuated by beatings from the instructor. One student was forced to
copy scholarly compositions while he was bound by bronze chains, most
likely as a result of debt.^5^

When I was in Catholic school, I wrote lines on sheets of notebook
paper. The content of the lines followed a
st![](media/image2.png){width="4.022223315835521in"
height="3.408419728783902in"}andard formula: “I will not,” followed by
whatever offense I had committed. These were terrible to write, but easy
to game; you could speed up the process by just writing each letter
straight down the page in columns.

Then I graduated to a public middle school. The first time I got lunch
detention, I sat on a stage in front of the whole cafeteria and received
a stapled packet containing the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights. I
was instructed to copy the entire thing; the irony was not lost on me,
even as a twelve-year-old. This was my first encounter with the
discipline packet.

In all the historical cases heretofore mentioned, writing is functioning
similarly to the Protagoran metaphor: technically and morally didactic,
the repetitive motion of the hand instilling both virtue and literacy.
Sometimes the writing was even intended to be read; in the case of the
enchained young scribe, the authors suggest that he copied tablets in
order to pay off his debt.^5^

But in modern examples, the writing sheds all pretense of improving
chirographic skill. Instead, the instruction is entirely moral: in a
more literal manifestation of Protagoras’s metaphor, the writing aims
not to demonstrate how to craft your letters, but how to craft the
conceptual framework by which you govern your behavior. A common
technique in the discipline packet is to offer an idealized,
first-person monologue concerning the offense; by copying it in writing,
the monologue is channeled through the mind of the pupil. (Fig. 2.)
Somewhere in this process, presumably, the idealized thoughts
surrounding the offense become the student’s actual thoughts.

The writing also sheds all pretense of being normal writing. No one
reads this discipline–writing. When lines are written in classic
chalkboard-style, the teacher who dolled out the punishment doesn’t read
every individual line–he might count them–but really the lines are
looked at as a whole, an image left as evidence of repetitive
labor.![](media/image1.jpeg){width="4.073091644794401in"
height="2.8511646981627297in"}

Cy Twombly’s asemic chalkboard paintings–in
which![](media/image3.png){width="2.283033683289589in"
height="2.406440288713911in"} writing is reduced to pure repetition and
physicality–are a useful analogue in this case. (Fig 3.) In both Twombly
and schoolroom punishment, the lines are more recorded gymnastics than
legible writing, documentation of physical and mental duress. There is
very little physicality in the discipline packet, but it can be
understood along similar lines: if you wrote it, you were forced to
think it. In these cases, writing is used not for communication, instead
as a means of asserting control over the student’s body and/or mind.

In 19th and early 20th century America, the Spencerian and
(subsequently) the Palmerian methods of penmanship instruction reigned
supreme.^6^ (Fig. 4.) In these handwriting techniques, mastery of the
will over the mind and body was deemed essential for good
penmanship–especially so in Palmer’s method, which was sometimes
referred to as the “muscular movement system.”^7^ Through endless drill
and repetition, restraint in writing became restraint in character;
school officials looked towards good penmanship as bulwark against vice.
An introduction to Spencer’s *Practical Penmanship* describes the author
patiently practicing his writing until finally “…the representations of
his hand were as pure and chaste and beautiful as the peerless
conceptions of his mind. “^8^

Graphology, which purported to reveal psychological traits through
analysis of the physical forms of handwriting, found widespread appeal
among American schools and popular culture during the era of Spencer and
Palmer. Books like *The Revelation of Character in Handwriting* claimed
that graphology was a scientific means towards self-knowledge, and
ordinary people underwent graphological examination for
self-improvement.^9^ Graphology is now considered a pseudoscience^,^ and
the Spencerian and Palmerian methods have long fallen out of favor; even
their 1978 update–the D’Nealian method–is beginning to disappear in
schools.^10^ But many of their underlying assumptions still persist in
disciplinary techniques.

Mind mapping has replaced the graphological examination as the means by
which Americans project their conception of self onto the page–or
screen. Much like graphology, mind mapping brands itself in the language
of self-help. A common exercise involves creating a diagram of
“emotions, feelings, facts, desires, thoughts, goals, etc.” surrounding
your conception of yourself; through creating the map, one heightens
self-understanding and gathers motivation to achieve
goals.^11^![](media/image4.png){width="3.6470417760279963in"
height="2.735281058617673in"}

Unlike copying a prefabricated inner-monologue about the event in
writing, mind mapping forces the student to actually construct an
original thought-process surrounding her offense. The only thing copied
in these cases is the skeletal framework; already present on the page,
it is presumably copied again in the student’s mind as a pattern of
thought. The actual details of the offense are less important than the
bounds of the rigid schema whose shape they must assume; in the case of
Fig. 5, each negative behavior has precisely three causes and three
consequences. Like rote copying on the chalkboard, these discipline
packets are providing language for the student to employ in their
self-conception; unlike rote copying, this language drops letters and
penmanship in order to depict raw causality in minimalist, geometric
form.

Is writing virtue virtuous? For that matter, is being forced to think
virtuous thoughts virtuous? What unifies all of the examples thus
far–from the *kemyt* of Middle Kingdom Egypt, to the mind-mapping
discipline packet of 21st century America–is an assumption that by
asking students to craft representations of virtue, they will somehow
acquire virtue. Spencerian penmanship didn’t deliver virtue solely
through brute enforcement of patience and restraint; the actual forms of
the letters held virtue in their graceful lines.

Perhaps what most unites the sophists, the Spencerians, and the
packet-wielding teachers of today is their belief in the power of their
representations: that the things they put on the page, or the
chalkboard, or the clay tablet are really a piece of them. The sophist
Gorgias famously believed that human thought and discourse, *logos,* was
a “powerful master” in shaping reality–in fact, it was the only reality
we could know.^2^ Faith in that powerful master is precisely what is
needed to believe that to change ourselves, we need only change the way
we write; that we can attain a life of virtue by tracing lines on a wax
tablet.![](media/image2.jpeg){width="2.5066721347331584in"
height="3.3422298775153108in"}

By the end of the *Protagoras*, the argument has grown so tangled that
its two adversaries have swapped sides: Socrates argues that virtue is a
form of knowledge, and thus teachable, whereas Protagoras argues that
virtue is not knowledge, and thus unteachable. Acknowledging that they
are simply arguing for the sake of argument at this point, the two of
them cut off the dispute amicably, without reaching a conclusion. In
another dialogue, the *Meno*, Socrates is again quizzed on whether or
not virtue can be taught; in this case, Socrates reaches a conclusion
contradictory to that of the *Protagoras–*that virtue exists in humans
as a gift from the gods. Similarly, when discussing his own powers of
virtue, Socrates provided a supernatural explanation. Beginning as a
child, an inner voice spoke in his head–Socrates calls it a *daimonion*,
or “divine something.” Whenever he was nearing a failure in virtue, it
offered a command warning him away from the act; notably, it only ever
turned Socrates away from acts, never towards them.^1^ One might imagine
its imperatives beginning:

“I WILL NOT…”

“I WILL NOT…”

“I WILL NOT…”

“I WILL NOT…”

References

1.  Plato., Cooper J, Hutchinson D. Complete Works. Indianapolis, Ind.:
    > Hackett Pub.; 1997:746-790, 897, 29.

*“This is what the most able, i.e., the richest, do. Their sons start
going to school at the earliest age and quit at the latest age. And when
they quit school, the city in turn compels them to learn the laws and to
model their lives on them. They are not to act as they please. An
analogy might be drawn from the practice of writing-teachers, who sketch
the letters faintly with a pen in workbooks for their beginning students
and have them write the letters over the patterns they have drawn. In
the same way the city has drawn up laws invented by the great lawgivers
in the past and compels them to govern and be governed by them. She
punishes anyone who goes beyond these laws, and the term for this
punishment in your city and others is, because it is a corrective legal
action, ‘correction.’”*

*“I have a divine or spiritual sign which Meletus has ridiculed in his
deposition. This began when I was a child. It is a voice, and whenever
it speaks it turns me away from something I am about to do, but it never
encourages me to do anything.”*

1.  Duke G. Sophists, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
    > Ieputmedu. 2016. Available at:
    > http://www.iep.utm.edu/sophists/\#SH3c. Accessed October 9, 2016.

2.  Muir J. A Note on Ancient Methods of Learning to Write. The
    > Classical Quarterly. 1984;34(01):236.
    > doi:10.1017/s0009838800029517.

3.  Williams R. Scribal Training in Ancient Egypt. Journal of the
    > American Oriental Society. 1972;92(2):214. doi:10.2307/600648.

4.  Cohen YKedar S. Teacher–Student Relationships: Two Case Studies.
    > Oxford Handbooks Online. 2011.
    > doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199557301.013.0011.

*"The ‘School Dialogues’ tell of a student chained up in the schoolhouse
as punishment (Vanstiphout 1997: 590, ll. 150–153), while a report from
7th- century Nineveh tells of a prominent young man from Babylonia
forced to work at copying tablets while in chains as a prisoner of the
Assyrians (Fales and Postgate 1995: no. 156). The lot of our scribe
Ribi-Dagan may have been the result of his being in debt, which he was
forced to pay off by copying tablets."*

1.  Wajda S. Inscribing the self. American Quarterly.
    > 1999;51(2):461-471. doi:10.1353/aq.1999.0021.

2.  Palmer A. The Palmer Method Of Business Writing.

3.  Spencer HSpencer P. Spencerian Key To Practical Penmanship. New
    > York: Ivison, Phinney, Blakeman; 1866.

4.  Remont F. The Revelation Of Character In Handwriting. Times Mirror
    > Printing and Binding House; 1918.

5.  Driver R, Buckley M, Frink D. Should We Write Off Graphology?.
    > International Journal of Selection and Assessment.
    > 1996;4(2):78-86. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2389.1996.tb00062.x.

6.  How to Mind Map Yourself. wikiHow. 2016. Available at:
    > http://www.wikihow.com/Mind-Map-Yourself. Accessed October
    > 9, 2016.

Images

Fig. 1. The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Cuneiform Tablet: School
Exercise Tablet. Ca. Late 1St Millennium B.C.. Available at:
http://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/321985. Accessed October
9, 2016.

Fig. 2. Manis C. Discipline Packet. 1st ed. Teacher-written Eduware;
2011. Available at: http://www.lapresenter.com/disciplinepacket.pdf.
Accessed October 9, 2016.

Fig. 3. Twombly C. Cold Stream.; 1966.

Fig. 4. Wikimedia. Spencerian Example.; 1884. Available at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASpencerian\_example.jpg.
Accessed October 9, 2016.

Fig. 5. ThinkingMaps. Behavior Reflections.; 2016. Available at:
http://thinkingmaps.com/discipline-desired-behaviors/. Accessed October
9, 2016.

Fig. 6. Autism Teaching Strategies. CBT Children's Anger Worksheet.;
2016. Available at:
http://autismteachingstrategies.com/autism-strategies/cbt-childrens-emotion-worsheet-series-7-worksheets-for-dealing-with-anger/.
Accessed October 9, 2016.
